Welcome to ARTS
===============

ARTS is free software. Please see the file COPYING for details.

If you use data generated by ARTS in a scientific
publication, then please mention this and cite the most
appropriate of the ARTS publications that are summarized on
http://www.radiativetransfer.org/docs/

[CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md) provides information on contributing
to ARTS on GitHub.
 
For documentation, please see the files in the doc subdirectory.
For building and installation instructions please read below.


Building ARTS
-------------

Build Prerequisites:

- gcc/g++ >=8 (or llvm/clang >=8) older versions might work, but are untested
- cmake (>=3.1.0)
- zlib
- blas
- lapack
- netcdf (optional)

To build the documentation you also need:

- pdflatex (optional)
- doxygen (optional)
- graphviz (optional)


Using cmake
-----------

Here are the steps to use cmake to build ARTS:

```bash
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

If you only want to build the arts executable you can just run 'make arts'
instead of 'make'.

If you have a multi-core processor or multiprocessor machine, don't forget
to use the -j option to speed up the compilation:

```bash
make -jX
```

Where X is the number of parallel build processes.
X=(Number of Cores)+1 gives you usually the fastest compilation time.


Build configurations
--------------------
To build a release version without assertions or debugging symbols use:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release ..
make clean
make
```

To switch back to the debug version use:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RelWithDebInfo ..
make clean
make
```

This is also the default configuration if you run cmake without
options in an empty build directory.

Native build (EXPERIMENTAL)
---------------------------

Finally, an experimental build type for Native infrastructures exists on GCC:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Native ..
make clean
make
```

This option should make the executable slightly faster, more so on better systems,
but not portable.  Note that since this build-mode is meant for fast-but-accurate
computations, some IEEE rules will be ignored.  For now only complex computations
are IEEE incompatible running this mode of build.

Tests
-----

'make check' will run several test cases to ensure that ARTS is working
properly. Use 'make check-all' to run all available controlfiles, including
computation time-intensive ones.

Some tests depend on the arts-xml-data package. cmake automatically looks if it
is available in the same location as ARTS itself. If necessary, a custom path
can be specified:

```bash
cmake -DARTS_XML_DATA_PATH=/home/myname/arts-xml-data ..
```

If arts-xml-data cannot be found, those tests are ignored.

By default, the tests are executed serially.
If you want to run them concurrently, you can use:

```bash
cmake -DTEST_JOBS=X ..
```

X is the number of tests that should be started in parallel.

You can also use the ctest command directly to run the tests:

```bash
ctest -j4
```

To run specific tests, use the -R option and specify part of the test case
name you want to run. The following command will run all tests that have 'ppath'
in their name, e.g. arts.ctlfile.fast.ppath1d ...:

```bash
ctest -R ppath
```

To see the output of ARTS, use the -V option:

```bash
ctest -V -R fast.doit
```

By default, ctest will not print any output from ARTS to the screen. The option
--output-on-failure can be passed to ctest to see output in the case an error
occurs. If you want to always enable this, you can set the environment variable
CTEST_OUTPUT_ON_FAILURE:

```bash
export CTEST_OUTPUT_ON_FAILURE=1
```


HITRAN catalog support
----------------------

By default, ARTS only supports the latest HITRAN 2012 catalog version. Because
isotopologues have been renamed between different catalog versions, ARTS needs
to be compiled for one specific HITRAN version. If you want to use HITRAN
2008, you have to recompile ARTS with:

```bash
cmake -DWITH_HITRAN2008=1 ..
make arts
```

To switch back to HITRAN 2012, run:

```bash
cmake -DWITH_HITRAN2008=0 ..
make arts
```


Optional features
-----------------

To include features that rely on Fortran code located in the 3rdparty
subdirectory use:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_FORTRAN=1 -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran ..
```

This enables Disort, Fastem, Refice and Tmatrix.

If necessary, certain Fortran modules can be selectively disabled:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_FORTRAN=1 -DNO_DISORT=1 ..
cmake -DENABLE_FORTRAN=1 -DNO_REFICE=1 ..
```

IMPORTANT: Only gfortran and Intel Fortran are currently supported.
Also, a 64-bit system is required (size of long type must be 8 bytes).


Enable C_API: To be able to use the ARTS workspace interface in typhon, you need
to enable building the C API:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_C_API=1 ..
```

Enable NetCDF: The basic matpack types can be read from NetCDF files, if NetCDF
support is enabled:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_NETCDF=1 ..
```


Disabling features
------------------

Disable assertions:
```bash
cmake -DNO_ASSERT=1 ..
```

Disable OpenMP:
```bash
cmake -DNO_OPENMP=1 ..
```

Disable the built-in documentation server:
```bash
cmake -DNO_DOCSERVER=1 ..
```

Treat warnings as errors:
```bash
cmake -DWERROR=1 ..
```

Disable FFTW autodetection:

ARTS automatically detects the availability of the FFTW3 library needed to
speed up the calculation of HITRAN cross section species . If you need
to disable FFTW support for any reason, you can do so with the following cmake
option:

```bash
cmake -DNO_FFTW=1 ..
```


TMatrix precision
-----------------

By default, ARTS uses double-precision for the T-matrix calculations.
When using the Intel compiler, quad-precision can be enable with cmake:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_FORTRAN=1 -DENABLE_TMATRIX_QUAD=1 ..
```

Note that quad-precision is software emulated. T-matrix calculations will
around 10x slower.


ccache support
--------------

To utilize ccache when available use:

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_CCACHE=1 ..
```

For details see https://ccache.samba.org/


Intel compiler
--------------

If you want to compile with the Intel compiler[1], start with an empty build
directory and run:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=icc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=icpc ..
```

[1] http://software.intel.com/c-compilers


LLVM/Clang compiler
-------------------

If you want to compile with the LLVM/Clang compiler[1], start with an empty build
directory and run:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++ ..
```

You might also have to explicitly pick the right Fortran compiler since clang
doesn't have one:

```bash
cmake -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=clang -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=clang++ \
-DENABLE_FORTRAN=1 -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran ..
```

Note that at this point, on OS X the default Apple Clang compiler does not
support OpenMP. Other versions of Clang support it via libomp.

[1] http://clang.llvm.org
[2] http://libcxx.llvm.org


macOS / Xcode
-----------

If you're on a Mac and have the Apple Xcode development environment installed,
you can generate a project file and use Xcode to build ARTS:

```bash
cmake -G Xcode ..
open ARTS.xcodeproj
```


Experimental features (ONLY USE IF YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE DOING)
--------------------------------------------------------------

Use C++11 and the new libc++ (currently only supported in Xcode builds):

```bash
cmake -G Xcode -DWITH_XCODE_LIBCPP=1 ..
```

Enable C++17 (only for compatibility testing, do not use C++17 features in your
code):

```bash
cmake -DENABLE_CXX17=1 ..
```


Valgrind profiling
------------------

The callgrind plugin included in valgrind is the recommended profiling method
for ARTS.

Due to limitations of valgrind, you need to disable the tmatrix code
(-DNO_TMATRIX=1) when compiling ARTS with Fortran support.

Certain things should be taken into account when calling ARTS with valgrind.
Since recursion (cycles) will lead to wrong profiling results it is
important to use the following settings to obtain profile data for ARTS:

```bash
valgrind --tool=callgrind --separate-callers=10 --separate-recs=3 arts -n1 ...
```

For detail on these options consult the valgrind manual:

http://valgrind.org/docs/manual/cl-manual.html#cl-manual.cycles

-n1 should be passed to ARTS because parallelisation can further scew the
results. Since executing a program in valgrind can lead to 50x slower
execution, it is recommended to create a dedicated, minimal controlfile for
profiling.

After execution with valgrind, the resulting callgrind.out.* file can be
opened in kcachegrind[1] for visualization. It is available as a package for
most Linux distributions.

Note that you don't have to do a full ARTS run. You can cancel the program
after some time when you think you have gathered enough statistics.

[1] https://kcachegrind.github.io/


gprof profiling
---------------

To utilize gprof to obtain profiling information, you can configure ARTS
in the following way:

1. Create an new build directory:
```bash
cd arts
mkdir build_profile
cd build_profile
```

2. Compile ARTS with profiling information:
```bash
CFLAGS="-pg" CXXFLAGS="-pg" FFLAGS="-pg" cmake ..
make arts
```

If your gprof version does not support GCC's latest dwarf format, you have
to force a compatible format:
```bash
CFLAGS="-pg -gdwarf-3" CXXFLAGS="-pg -gdwarf-3" FFLAGS="-pg -gdwarf-3" cmake ..
```

3. Run ARTS in the configuration you want to analyze:
```bash
src/arts MYCONTROLFILE.arts
```

4. Step 3 created a file gmon.out with timing information. Use gprof to
analyze it:
```bash
gprof src/arts
```

As gprof adds code overhead into the produced binary, using a sampling profiler
such as 'Instruments' on Mac OS X or callgrind on Linux is recommended to obtain
more realistic timing results.

